We talked about monetary policy,
which is the policy of controlling
everything to do with money and currencies,
like interest rates, inflation, money supply, et cetera.
And, usually, central banks in countries,
or the federal reserve in the United States,
is responsible for monetary policy.
Let's move on now and talk about
something called fiscal policy,
which is basically how governments
try to stimulate or improve the economy
by spending money that is collected by taxes
or money that it has borrowed.
And the money usually comes from
citizens like you and I as we have paid taxes,
or you and I buy bonds from the
government as an investment for us.
So, when we buy a bond the government
promises to pay us money back plus interest.
And they use that money,
that they got from us when we bought that bond,
to make the economy grow
or to fund projects that should
benefit the economy, like building a bridge
or for, unfortunately funding wars,
which, for what it's worth, can
really help the economy grow.
And war, again, for what it's worth,
can help the stock markets as well, in that country.
We know that when it comes to monetary policy
the government can help the economy
by lowering interest rates,
but with fiscal policy, the government
spends money to help stimulate the economy.
And I think it makes most sense
for governments to spend a lot
of money building roads, or bridges,
or bullet trains, or next-generation transportation systems
when the economy is contracted.
Now, recall that the definition
of a recession is when GDP, or gross domestic product,
contracts for two quarters in a row, year over year.
Now, a depression is defined, by some economists,
as meaning "two years of GDP contraction."
So, that means eight quarters in a row.
So, who is in charge of fiscal policy?
In the Unites States, it is the
Secretary of the Treasury who heads
up the U.S. Department of the Treasury.
And this person's goal is to manage
the government's revenue,
and to make sure that the economy is growing,
and that the country's financial situation is doing well,
meaning they look at tax policies,
the amount of debt the country has, et cetera.
And the first treasury secretary in the 1700s
and the person that made many
of the policies and financial systems
and rules, that we still use today
in the United States, was Alexander Hamilton,
who is on the front of this U.S. ten-dollar bill.
Unlike Kieth Richards, from the Rolling Stones,
who is on the front of the American twenty-dollar bill.
And, I'm kidding, obviously, about Kieth Richards,
(laughs)
this section can be a little bit
dry without my awful attempts at dad humor.
And, as you can see, the Treasury
billing is on the back of the ten-dollar bill.
Okay, lets get back to fiscal policy.
Countries are not run like companies are.
When a country has economic problems,
quite often they run a huge deficit,
which means they might cut taxes
in order to stimulate the economy
or to stimulate economic demand
by enticing consumers to spend more money,
which helps to stimulate the economy.
Similarly, countries can stimulate
their economy by spending a lot of money
on building roads or bridges or trains, et cetera,
during very difficult economic times.
And so when countries take on
more than they can make in taxes,
this is called a deficit,
and the opposite of this is called a surplus.
And it's very controversial to have
deficits for a very long period of time.
And I remember during the crisis of 2008
governments created massive stimulus policies,
which some younger people said,
"It's not a stimulus; it's a steal-from-us."
And I understand that concern.
It's a tough call.
But desperate times always call
for desperate measures,
and governments ran out of monetary
policy bullets in 2008.
And they massively cut interest
rates almost to zero,
and the global economy was still
in a, nearly unprecedented, free fall.
And the government here, in the United States,
created unprecedented fiscal policies,
like buying cars from people,
which was called Cash for Clunkers.
And, at that point, it seemed like
monetary and fiscal policies didn't work,
which was an economic, catastrophic conundrum.
And the stock markets were crashing
all over the world.
It was just terrible.
And, eventually, the government
in the United States declared it illegal
to short or bet against more than
800 of the largest companies on
the major U.S. stock market exchanges.
The government then pumped a ridiculous
amount of money into the banking system
by buying troubled assets from banks
in huge, unprecedented proportions.
And this was called the
Troubled Asset Relief Program, or TARP,
which was part of the
Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008.
When the Department of the Treasury created TARP,
this initially gave them the ability
to buy back or to create insurance
on 700 billion dollars of troubled assets,
many of which were financial instruments
tied to low-quality mortgage securities.
We'll talk about mortgages in
a lot of detail soon.
But we need to understand this first.
What happened, was that the banks
got more money, of course,
but they then did not want to lend it to anybody.
How ridiculous.
I know this firsthand because
none of us could get our mortgages approved.
Then, the government pressured the banks to lend us,
and thank God they did because they lent us money.
And I remember at the time it was so hard man.
My neighbors, on the left side
and the right side of mine in 2008, foreclosed,
meaning the banks took over their houses
because poor guys couldn't
afford to make their mortgage payments.
And I actually, this is true,
I got down on my knees and I begged
my mortgage broker to let me refinance
my mortgage at a lower rate then.
I had to beg.
And, miraculously, the global economy recovered,
but there's a generation of people
that got shafted and had trouble finding jobs,
and the fact that interest rates
are still very low, historically speaking,
is a signal that things are not that great yet.
And recall that, when rates are very low,
then higher risk investments do relatively well,
like more speculative stocks and real estate
in many parts of the world.
And because if rates are high
then you'll just put you money
in the bank anyway and earn the interest.
So, if there is a huge deficit
in some of the larger economies in the world,
then why don't governments just
raise taxes, especially on the very very rich?
And I agree there should be, to a certain extent,
higher taxes on the higher tax brackets,
but there are so many reasons why
many politicians don't do this.
One of the reasons they don't do this,
is they might not get re-elected if they do this.
So, why do governments spend too much,
aside from the fact that they want
to get re-elected?
Well, in the 1930s, during the Great Recession,
for quite a while the government did nothing,
and thought that, eventually, the
economy would get better,
and then a brilliant Cambridge University
guy, named John Maynard Keynes.
said that governments should spend
a lot of money when the economy is bad,
and this will get us out of extreme recessions.
Keynes was right.
He was right, and this is referred
to now as Keynesian economics,
which means that active fiscal policy
and monetary policy can rescue
a bad economy in the short run.
In the long run, who knows?
But for years people have been saying
that running deficits is a bad thing,
and Ronald Reagan, when I was a kid,
back in the 80s, was a big advocate of this.
And, heck, I don't know, maybe
2008 occurred partially due to
overspending, actually, it definitely did.
But it is what it is.
And some of the larger economies
will continue to run massive deficits
for the foreseeable future.
And so, we have to ask ourselves,
"How can they get away with this?"
Because they still make interest
payments on their debt.
Okay?
If they don't make interest payments
on their debts, then, one day,
if the don't make these payments,
they will default on their debts,
which will be a catastrophe, given globalization
and the fact that all major economies are connected.
As one big economy, that has a huge deficit,
is only allowed to do so because
another major economy lets them do it,
they're joined at the hip.
And I want to quickly mention why
the United States spent so much
money and cut taxes to try to get
out of the 2008 recession
and some other major economies did not.
Well, what happened in the United States,
and you really have to understand
government policies when it comes to
investing in bonds longer-term,
that's why we're going through this, Okay?
But the head of the Federal Reserve
in the United States in 2008 was
a guy named Ben Bernanke.
And I mention him because he did his thesis,
when was at Princeton University,
on depressionary economics,
and had he not had extreme views
given his tutelage, it's debatable,
but perhaps the U.S. economy today
would be underperforming like some
other very large economies are today.